The 16th Century Story, “Tales of a Parrot, the Tutinama. Chapter 1V. The Fourth Night
In the late 16 century Akbar had successfully expanded his reign into the Indian sub-continent,
it was during this time that Abul-l-Fazl put together a multi text encyclopedia.
This encyclopedia contained information like statistics, geography, descriptions of India, and the Ancient practices of Hinduism.
The story begins on the fourth night. Two gentlemen are conversing, a solder and a
nobleman. The solder is away from home, and the topic of his 5wife’s chastity came into the conversation.
The solder had with him a nosegay that his wife had given to him as a symbol of her chastity.
She had told him that as long as the nosegay was fresh so her chastity would be as well.
The nobleman told the solder that he thought the wife was conducting some kind of sorcery to be able to get the solder to believe such foolishness.
The nobleman insisted that the nosegay was not going to keep the solders wife chaste. The nobleman knew of two cooks that were known for their cunning, and their expertise.
The nobleman sent the cooks to the wife’s country to try to form an intimate bond with her.
The nobleman wanted the cooks to see if the wife was faithful and that her nosegay was fresh.
The idea was once the cooks had tried to trick the wife into intimacy that they would return to the nobleman and tell him whether or not the wife had fallen for the trick.
The cook then went to the wife’s country and got a procuress to offer himself to the wife.
The wife did not agree to the arrangement but did ask the cook to come alone and not bring the procuress with him because women like this could not be trusted to keep a secret.
The wife said she wanted to see if the proposed man was suitable or not.
The wife had grown suspicious of the situation and on her land she had a dry well.
She placed fabric on the top of the well to conceal it and asked the cook to come sit on it.
The cook fell through the thin fabric to the bottom of the well. The wife then asked the cook who he was and who sent him. The cook then confessed that the nobleman sent him and that it was all a test to see if she had remained chaste in her husband’s absence.
The cook was trapped at the bottom the well and was not able to get out.
The nobleman became worried and then he offered the second cook money and a bounty of goods to go to the wife and pretend to be a merchant.
The same thing that happened to the first cook happened to the second cook, neither of them returned to the nobleman.
The nobleman became worried that something terrible had happened to the cooks so he took it upon himself to go to the city to see what happened.
The nobleman had disguised himself as a hunter.
The solder and the nobleman travelled together but the solder went to his wife’s house.
When the solder arrived at his wife’s house she had told him about the cooks and her predicament.
The solder rescued the men from the well and told them that his wife and him were having guests for the night and ordered them to wear women’s clothing and be servants for the guests.
The nobleman arrived at the evening and was quick to ask what these women had done to receive such punishment, as their hair had been shaved.
During the cook’s time in the well they had become malnourished and had lost most of their hair and their appearance had changed considerably.
The solder then asked the nobleman to ask them themselves what they had done, and he commented that is was an atrocious crime. When the nobleman looked at them closely, he recognized them as the cooks.
The cooks then recognized the nobleman and began to weep and proclaimed the wife’s innocence.
The wife then told the nobleman, that he was wrong for accusing her of being a sorceress and he was foolish for not believing her good character.
She had once and for all proved her virtue and innocence and that her husband’s trust was in good hands.
The nobleman then asked for forgiveness for the unsavoury things he had done.